# Project Workbook (T1)

## Q1

A markup language is defined by a system based on a set of elements such as keywords, names and tags to present a given page and the content within it. They are the building blocks of web pages. Essentially, a markup language is used by a computer to display that is readable for people therefore it is commonly written in the common language rather than programming language terminology. The main language used of the internet is HTML (Hyper Text Markup Language) all pages are written in HTML or a version of it. 

There is a difference between markup languages and programming languages, what makes markup different is that the language itself is not based on algorithms and dynamic programming based on a database, it is a static language that can only be edited through making changes to the HTML tags.

All markup languages share the fact that a "tag" is used to present and differentiate content on a page, these tags are usually wrapped in angled brackets `<>`. This is because when developing the web page the text and instructions need to be separated for the computer to understand what is required. Each tag defines a specific section of the page an example of this is below where a link to google would be displayed in "Go to Google" within the body of the page.

```html
<body>
    <a href="https://google.com">Go to Google</a>
</body>
```

Furthermore HTML has a special way of defining tags built into the language which assists with screen readers for those who have need of accessibility features, these are called semantic tags. Semantic tags are used to replace `<div>` and provide more specific and meaningful information to both browsers and developers. In HTML there are several semantic tags that can be taken advantage of an example of this are the `<figure>` and `<figcaption>` tags which can be used to create a clear representation that the element displayed is an image with context information not being lost in a general `<div>` as it is within the `<figcaption>` tag. Another example of this is the `<form>` which is used to represent forms. Overall semantic tags are a significant component of HTML as it provivdes clearer context to developers and the web page itself whilst also providing better accessibility to those who need it.

The HTML markup language in has a specific way of setting up the web page within the IDE so that it is functional. The first is `<!DOCTYPE html>` which gives the web page information on what type of page to expect in this case it would be HTML5. The next would be the `<head>` which is a container for things such as metadata (charsets, doc title, styles, viewports, keywards, etc). The data itself is not displayed however has a significant impact on the page itself. The final part of the markup language that is needed is the `<body>` this component houses all of the content on the page and can be manipulated through the use of styling which can be done within the tags used in `<body>` or in `<head>`.

Another common and significant component of the markup languages for HTML is the ability to style the content, the ability to create a web page itself is simple enough but styling is what gives it the sense of identity that makes up the internet. The . This can be done within the HTML document itself through either inline styling or internal sheet styling, otherwise best practice is to use a separate CSS file that is linked to the HTML document. Inline styling is where the styling itself is done within the element itself so for example below;

```html
<h4 style="color:white; font-size:23px"> Example Text </h4>
```
Internal sheet styling is where the `<style>` tag contains the styling information usually located within the `<head>`. This is usually completed using the selectors; Type, Class, ID, Pseudo Classes. The syntax for this is the same as for having an external stylesheet.
```css
h1 {
    color: #ad3103;
    text-align: center;
}
```
An external stylesheet is the recommended way to style content for a few reasons, including; reusability between pages by linking the one page, separation of concerns meaning content and functionality are separated making code easier to read and maintain, caching as the browser will not have to download the CSS document every time which increases the performance and compatibility as different browsers support different styles.

Synax for linking a stylesheet;

`<link rel="stylesheet" href = "css/style.css">`


## Define the features of the following technologies that are essential in terms of the development of the internet:
 - packets
 - IP addresses (IPv4 and IPv6)
 - routers and routing
 - domains and DNS

Explain how each technology has contributed to the development of the internet. 

### Packets
