# **Week 2 Notes**

## **Flexbox**

* Without `display: flex` it will not accomodate size changes, it changes style to make sure it works well on any device
* 2 Axis to think about when using flex `flex-direction: row;` or `flex-direction: column;`
* `flex-wrap: wrap;` will wrap the content back around
* **`flex-flow: pos pos;` combines `flex-direction` and `flex-wrap` e.g. `flex-flow: row wrap;`
* `justify-content: pos;`  (start, end, center, space-around, space-between)allows to determine how to align elements depending on the axis
* `align-items: pos;` does the same thing as justify-content however it is for `flex-direction: column` (unable to see without mutliple rows)

Use a **[cheatsheet](https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/a-guide-to-flexbox/)** as there are several different ways to move and align elements.

**Centering a single element**
```html
<style>
    display: flex;
    justify-content: center;
    align-items: center;
</style>
```

## **Responsive Design**

### **What is Responsive Design**
It solves a problem that screens nowadays have different sizes. Websites then need to be accomodating to these differences.
* Phones, tablets, laptops, desktops, projectors, watches, etc

### **Responsive Design Tools**
* Optimization of HTML with viewport size
* Start using percentages for sizing
* Media breakpoints allow changes depending on size and width of screen
* Flexbox and Frameworks

### **Mobile First**
Mobile is designed first because it can scale up to a desktop device. If a website fits on a mobile device, it's easier to fit onto a desktop.

### **Demo**
`<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">`

This meta tag is used to notify css to modify depending on the viewport size fo the user.

#### **Percentages**
When using static values it's always the best idea because it does not account for user's screen. Instead percentages may be used e.g. `width: 100%;` meaning 100% of the viewport

### **Media Breakpoints**
Changing size of text depending on viewport or size of screen. 
```html
<style>
    @media screen and (max-width: 600px) p {
        font-size: 20px;
    }
</style>

<style>
    /* @media screen and (sizing) selector {
        styles
    } */
</style>
```
Above code says that the media selected will change to size depending on the size of the viewport `(max-width: 600px)`. It is also still apart of styling so can make multiple changes to style or selectors.

## Effects and Animation

### Psuedo Class rehash

Special type of class that changes styling of element depending on what user is doing.
* There are some things that are auto stylised e.g. links knowing that a user has been there before but this can be changed.
* There are different psuedo classes depending on selectors and classes use a **cheatsheet!**
* In styling there are different instructions that can be used to apply something like a transition effect
e.g.
```html
<style>
        .box {
            width: 100px;
            height: 100px;
            background: salmon;
            transition: 2s;
        }

        .box:hover{
            width:200px;
            height:200px;
        }
```
**Transform attributes:** The transform property allows for specific transformations. Use a **cheatsheet!**
*  `transform: control control` you are able to have multiple transformations in the one line

**Keyframing** 
* `@keyframes` allows controls of keyframe animations
* animation duration can be set and keyframe times can be set with @keyframes]
* Within keyframes you are able to place the usual styling settings 
* instead of % you are also able to use `from{}` and `to{}`

```html
    <style>

        .box {
            width: 100px;
            height: 100px;
            background: salmon;
            animation-name: colorful-text;
            animation-duration: 5s;
        }

        @keyframes colorful-text {
            0% {
                background: salmon;
            }
            50% {
                background: yellow;
            }
            100% {
                background: blue;
            }
        }
```
## Typography

Differnt styles can be presently different depending on the browsers. To fix this CSS is used.

* `em` units in sizing make them a multiple of the base unit size
* Some fonts may or may not support the `font-weight` type wanted
* There are web safe fonts (supported by default) so check a list
* When defining a `font-family` to be used always use backup fonts to be used e.g. `cursive`, `sans-serif`
* You are able to get around default fonts by using smething like google fonts that has a `<link>` css file hosted online by google