## Loops 
```python
# Guess number game
# 6 Guesses to guess a number between 1 and 20

#pseudo
# import random module
import random
# assign a random number to variable
number = random.randint(1, 20)
# for guesses guesses_left in 6..1 pseduo has range as start..stop 
for guesses_left in range (6, 0, -1):
    # ask for a guess
    guess = int(input(f'Take a guess ({guesses_left})left:'))
    # display hint 'higher', 'lower', or 'correct
    if guess < number:
        print ('Too low!')
    elif guess > number:
        print ('Too high!')
     # if corret, end program
    else:
        print ('Correct!')
        break

    # if 6 incorrect guesses
if guess != number:
    print(f'Sorry! The number was {number}')
```
For loops have a few parts the index variable `guesses_left` and the array/list to be indexed `range (6,0,-1)`. 

In Python a variable in a loop does is still accessible outside of it because in Python a loop is not a new scope. No parent or child scope is created with loops.


***
## Lists

The same as an array however Python calls them lists. They are declared using `[]`

Different langauges support different types of lists in Python they allow for hetrogenous values within the list. Others may only allow homogeneous.

* Hetrogeneous array: Allow several data types to be used in lists
* Homogeneous array: Allow a single data type in a list

The reason string values can be split e.g. is because they are essentially lists internally. This means that string controls can be majority used for lists.
```python
x = "Hello'
print (x[0:3]) #slice operator
```
The first number `0` is the start index and the second number `3` is the stop index.

* Stop index is exclusive meaning not included. Inclusive means that it is included in data taken

Lists can have inner lists accessed through secondary [].
```python
tic_tac_toe = [
   ['', '0', ''],
   ['x', '0', ''],
   ['', 'x', '']]
print (tic_tac_toe[1][1]) # first [] is outer list second [] is inner list
```
The reason the format can be like this is because Python actually ignores the extra white space.

The `enumerate()` function in Python3 is used to loop over an iterable object (such as a list or a tuple) while keeping track of the index of the current item. It takes an iterable object as input and returns an iterator that yields a tuple containing the index and value of each item in the iterable.

`(index, value)` Is what comes from enumerate which is why 2 variables are needed as per below.

```python
for index, animal in enumerate(spam):
    print (f'{index}. {animal}')
# Would print
0. cat
2. dog
3. bird
```
### Multiple Assignment

You are able to assign multiple variables with values in a list in one line of code. The number of variables and length of list must be equal.
```python
cat = ['fat', 'gray', 'loud']
size, color, disposition = cat
# You can skip a value by putting _ e.g. size, color, _ = cat
```

### List Methods

A method is the same thing as a function, except it is used on a particular object / used on a value. 

```python
spam = ['cat', 'dog', 'bird']
spam.index('cat')
# Would return 0
```
Append method adds items to end of list and can only take one value. 
```python
spam.append('snake')
# Adds 'snake` to end of spam list
# Through use of concat method we can add more than one value
spam += ['snake', 'owl']
```

The `del` statement will delete values at an index in a list. All of the values in the list after the deleted value will be moved up one index. In the code below if `del spam[1]` is used `cat` will be deleted and `dog` will then be `spam[1]`
```python
spam = ['cat', 'dog', 'bird']
```
You can determine whether a value is or isn’t in a list with the `in` and `not in` operators. Like other operators, in and not in are used in expressions and connect two values: a value to look for in a list and the list where it may be found. These expressions will evaluate to a Boolean value. 

```python
spam = ['cat', 'dog', 'bird']
if 'cat' in spam:
    print (True)  # Prints True
```

* `random.choice(spam)` chooses a random elements in the list.
* `random.shuffle(spam)` shuffles the elements into random order


`sort()` sorts the list according to ASCIIbetical order. This means uppercase letters come before lowercase letters. Therefore, the lowercase a is sorted so that it comes after the uppercase Z. If you need to sort the values in regular alphabetical order, pass str.lower

```python
spam.sort(reverse=True) # Reverses current order of list.
spam.sort(key=str.lower) # Alphabetical order
```
`remove()` allows you to choose value to remove instead of index `del` is index. If there are multiple elements of the same value it will remove first instance.

```python  
spam.remove('dog') # Removes first instance of dog
del spam[1] # Removes index [1] of array
```
Magic 8 Ball using a list. Need's to have - 1 from len(answers) because the length is 6 when using `len(answers)` however array starts index at 0 with code below it makes it so array length matches index length.
```python
print('Magic 8 Ball')
import random
answers = [
    'It is certain',
    'It is decidedly so',
    'Yes',
    'Ask again later',
    'Concentrate and ask again',
    'Reply hazy try again'
]
print(answers[random.randint(0,len(answers) - 1)]) # Allows more answers to be added. Cannot use -1 because not indexing
```
This version compared to the `case` or `if` version is more general and more flexible. Changes can be made to the list and it is no longer repeating code unnecessarily.

***
## Tuples

Are read only lists. The declaration for an immutable list () instead of []

An example of a tuple is a string. However this can be changed through slicing and concatenation. Need to slice 
```python
name = 'Zophie a cat'
newName = name[0:7] + 'the' + name[8:12]
# name 'Zophie a cat'
# newName'Zophie the cat'
```

## Dictionaries (Dicts)
***
Rather than [] dictionaries are declared using {}, they are defined by key value pairs. The values can be any type however the key must be a string. It can be a list or dictionary as well to nest them. 

```python
my_cat = { 
    'name': 'Pixel',
    'breed' : 'Tonkinese',
    'color' : 'Chocolate Solid',
    'age',: 0.25 }

print (my_cat['name']);
```
* Keys are abrirtrary but needs to be a string. The values can be any data types.
* Unordered data structure, the order has no meaning and cannot be accessed using an index ([i])
* To access you need to provide the key name 

Due to this you are only able to check if the key exists and not the value.
```python
if 'foo' in my_cat:
    print (my_cat['foo'])
else:
    print('foo not found')
```
You are to do something else such as below where in the first one lists it all out, whilst the second one k = key and v = value as variables to access the dictionary.

```python
print (my_cat.items())

for k, v in my_cat.items():
    print (f'{k} has the value: {v}')
```
the pop() function is able to take a value out of a list. For example if you are getting a user to select and don't want them to select the same value. No way to undo a pop() however you are able to repopulate the list using a function.
```python
x = my_cat.pop['breed']
print (x)
print (my_cat)

# del my_cat['breed'] also deletes
```
You are able to update multiple values in dicts using the update() method. Otherwise you can call the specific key. You can also use this to replace any deleted or popped values.
```python
my_cat.update ({'age': 0.5, 'color': 'Cinnamon'})
# OR could be better to do as below for better intent and understanding
new_details = {'age': 0.5, 'color': 'Cinnamon'}
my_cat.update (new_details)
# OR for single values?
my_cat['age'] = 25
```

Write a program to get a user input of a name. If that name is in the people list, print the details of that person, otherwise print an error message.
```python
people = [
    {'name': 'Matt', 'age': 50},
    {'name': 'John', 'age': 25},
    {'name': 'Mary', 'age': 34}
]

while True:
    # 1 Get input from the user
    name = input("Who are you searching for? (Nothing to exit)")
    if name == "": 
        break
    # 2 Compare name to list
    # 3 if Name is in people list print details
    # found = False # sets variable to check however due to else 
    for person in people: # to iterate over list
        if person['name'].lower() == name.lower(): #to check the 'name' field key
            # found = True # sets variable to True once person is found
            print (f"{person['name']} is {person['age']} years old")
            break # one match is found break the loop
    # else print error message

    # if not found:
    #     print(f"{name} not found!")
    # OR
    else: # else can be used as part of for and only be exexcuted if for loop finishes list
        print(f"{name} not found!")
        age = int(input(f'What is {name}\'s age?'))
        new_person = {'name': name, 'age': age}
        people.append(new_person)
```
`else` can be used for other things and CONTEXT is king in programming. When used in for statements it is only used if loop finishes which is part of the reason why break is used to exit some loops such as above to find a name. This makes it so that a variable of boolean is not needed for an extra if statement.

The lower() or upper() functions can be used to change the characters to all be same as either capital or non which can be used to help with search.

`\` is referred to as an escape character, here it is used cancel the normal functionality of the single quote and just have it print normally as part of the string.

***
## Libraries and Modules

Standard libraries are a set of functions, code, variables etc in a module that are available with installing Python. 

Libraries are useful as they save memory and are more efficient to memory. Importing will automatically search local files first and the `import` keyword will automatically search and allow usage of functions within the file.

For example making a new python file with below then using import to import greet.py (name of file).
```python
# in greet.py
def hello(name):
    print (f'Hello, {name}!')
def goodbye(name):
    print (f'Goodbye, {name}!')
PI = 3.1459
# in main file
import greet
greet.hello('matt')
print(greet.PI)
```
* It is not suggested to import the whole module because it is inefficient so instead do below to import only what you need.
```python
# in main file
from greet import hello
hello('Matt')
```
When importing as a module in the terminal e.g. `python3 -m pip install (w/e installation is called)` need to make sure python3 is used at start to ensure python3 version is installed.

`pip` is the package manager that is available in Python 3 as standard installed with Python 3.

Within the context of python the `-m` is used to run pip as a script to invoke pip for use of installing terminal palette?

By using the `python3 -m pip list` command all packages will be listed out for users to see dependencies for project. `python3 -m pip freeze` also does this however it excludes any system packages, showing 3rd party only.

`python3 -m pip freeze > requirements.txt` sends list from freeze to txt then by using `-m pip install -r requirements.txt` it will install all dependencies listed out and the version on the txt as well.

*** 
## API's 

End points are like URL's that you can use to make requests to access data/the interface, in some cases data may need to be input to use.

`python3 -m pip install requests` You can also use == (no spaces around ==) version at end for specific versions of installs.

Requests is the standard for making requests in python.

***
## Object Oriented Programming (OOP)

Programming model that organises software design around data, objects rather than functions and procedural logic.

An object is a collection of what it knows and what it can do. For example strings know letters and you are able to do things such as how to convert itself to upper case. Providing actions that can be done on a string.

Class is a container that holds functionality related to attributes, ie the methods.

### Principles of OOP
1. **Encapsulation:** Each object keepts its attributes private, and controls which extneral entities can access attributes and how they can access them by providing methods to access.

Something external to the object can't change the data (protected data) of the object, so can only be changed externally if explicity told to.

2. **Abstraction:** Objects provide a consistent, high-level interface to interaction, hiding complexities of their internal structure and workings.

3. **Inheritance:** Define objects in a heirarcy. Parent objects encapsulate shared attributes and actions and child objects can differentiate where needed. Can have child classes inherit methods, functions from parents.

4. **Polymorphism:** Parent objects can define actions (methods) and child objects can implement those named methods in different ways.

### Benefits
* Reusubale code
* Simple and clear interface through encapsulation and abstraction
* Flexibility through polymorphism

Examples
```python
print('Matt'.upper())
print(type('Matt'))
# Will return 
# MATT
# <class 'str'>
```
A class as per above has functions within it that affects what it knows which in this case is the parameter of `Matt`. Can think of classes as a template to put onto an object giving it data and instructions that are usable.

Name of the class and name of the file is generally the same. However when declaring a class it is in pascal case (SomeoneNew)

`dir(object)` Gives list of methods/attributes available in the class to use for objects or classes. They will have default values and this can be searchable on Python Documentation.

```python
# person file for classes
class Person:
    def greet(self): # used as a pass so parameter isnt passed implicity by object where it is being used
        pass
# main file
print(p1.greet) # withotu greet() it comes out as what it is but greet() calls the method
```
Because the method is attached to a class it passes the object attached as an implicity argument even if nothing is in `()`. It takes `p1`. To make sure this doesn't happen the convention is python is to put `self`