# JS DOM and Events

## **Class Notes**

* innerHTML allows access to the children of the HTML element
* outerHTML allows access to the parents and children elements

**DOM (document object model)**

When inspecting the JS with `Use in Console`, using the variable that the console gives for the inspected element and typing it out, for example `temp 0` was given when inspecting an element so `temp 0` in console will give functions available for the variable. To get element must right click the element in console.

To access the browser within code it needs to be accessed and there are a few ways to do this. 

1. The legacy way uses id's where an id is given to the html code and the js calls the document function to access it.  
   
    When a browser encounters a `script` tag with the defer attribute, it will continue parsing the HTML document without blocking, and the script file will be downloaded in the background. The execution of the script is deferred until the document parsing is complete. Once the parsing is finished, the deferred scripts are executed in the order they appear in the document. `Defer` is used to keep the scrpt in memory

    The `async` attribute says script should be downloaded at the same time while the HTML doc is being parsed and it will execute as soon as possible without blocking the HTML content.

   ```html
    <!-- in head -->
    <script async defer src="script.js"></script>
    <!-- in body -->
    <h1 id="heading">DOM Lesson</h1>
   ```
   ```javascript
    const el = document.getElementById('heading')
    console.log(el)
    el.innerHTML = 'Hello <span style ="color:red">World!</span>' 
   ```
2. The newer way is by using `document.querySelector`.
   * Only selects the first element unless `querySelectorAll` is used and an array is always returned even if empty.
   * It can also be used to find a specific element e.g. `.querySelector('li  li:nth-child(2)')`

   ```html
    <!-- in head -->
    <script async defer src="script.js"></script>
    <!-- in body -->
    <h1 id="heading">DOM Lesson</h1>
   ```
   ```javascript
    // selection using querySelector
    const el = document.querySelector('#heading') 
    console.log(el)
    // Selection using nth child
    const el = document.querySelector('ul li:nth-child(2)');
    console.log(el);
    // Selection using array
    const el = document.querySelectorAll('ul li')
    console.log(el[1])
   ```

**Creating a new element in JS**

When creating a new element in JS the element must be inserted into the DOM tree otherwise it does not exist in the DOM.

Creates a new div and inserts into the DOM

```javascript
const newDiv = document.createElement('div') // identifies what type of element
console.log(newDiv)
document.body.appendChild(newDiv) // appends to the <body> element
console.log(document.body.childNodes[1]) // Finds the first child element in body
```
Inserts before the selected element.

`document.body.insertBefore(newDiv, document.querySelector('ul'))`

Adding this to the code above will cause the element to rerender with a H3 in it.

`newDiv.innerHTML = '<h3>Awesome div content!</h3>'`

This adds onto an existing unordered list

```javascript
const newLi = document.createElement('li')
newLi.innerText = 'Another list element'
document.querySelector('ul').appendChild(newLi)
```
This single line below replaces the code above. Getting the element, appending the end of it with `+=` and regenerates the DOM

`document.querySelector('ul').innerHTML += '<li>New Li</li>'`

A basic loop can also be created using JSON style content for data to be filled, below is hardcoded to fill the `ul` element however this can also be done using an API connection.

```javascript
const items = [
    "Adding to the DOM",
    "Querying the DOM",
    "Changing the DOM",
    "Event Listeners",
]

const ul = document.querySelector('ul')

for (const item of items) {
    // This line replaces all of the others 
    ul.innerHTML += `<li>${item}</li>`
    // const newLi = document.createElement('li')
    // newLi.innerText = item
    // ul.appendChild(newLi)
}
```

This arrow forEach function replaces the whole function as well. However is slow because the page needs to refresh every each time the document is parsed due to the loop which is not good in a large dataset situation

```javascript
items.forEach(item=> ul.innerHTML += `<li>${item}</li>`)
```

So instead of using this the map function can be used with the join function to turn into a string. Reason is because map returns an array of processed items.

```javascript
ul.innerHTML = items.map(item => `<li>${item}</li>`).join('') // also chooses the html element in UL that is <li>
```

This is for if there is only one type of element

```javascript
document.querySelector('ul').innerHTML = items.map(item => `<li>${item}</li>`).join('')
```

## **Events**

Event listener can show severeal things which can be visible using the below code then inspecting and using in console on the element.

```javascript
h1.addEventListener('click', event => console.log(event))
```

# JS Async and Callbacks

## **Callbacks**

In JavaScript, a callback is a function that is passed as an argument to another function and is intended to be executed after the completion of that function or at a specific event. Callbacks are commonly used in asynchronous operations, such as making API requests, reading files, or performing animations, where the result is not immediately available, and we want to handle the result or perform some action when it becomes available.

**Old Way**
This code below uses callback through the name of the function to be executed as per below.

1. The adder function takes three arguments: x, y, and callback.
2. Inside the adder function, the callback function is invoked with the result of adding x and y as its argument.
3. The adder function is called with x set to 5, y set to 10, and a callback function as the third argument. The callback function takes the answer parameter and logs it to the console.
4. After calling adder, the line console.log('done') is executed immediately.

```javascript
function adder(x, y, callback) { // the third parameter is just convention
    callback (x + y) // which will be used here
}

adder(5, 10, answer => console.log(answer))

console.log('done')
```

Another example of a callback is the below code. 

1. The myMap function is called with the numbers array and the callback x => x * 2.
2. Inside the myMap function, a new empty array result is created.
3. The for...of loop iterates over each element (item) in the numbers array.
4. For each element, the callback (arrow function x => x * 2) is applied, and the result is pushed into the result array using result.push(callback(item)).
5. After the loop finishes, the result array, containing the mapped elements, is returned.
6. The returned result array is stored in the doubled variable.
7. Finally, the doubled array is logged to the console, showing [10, 24, 64, 200].

```javascript
const numbers = [5, 12, 32, 100]

function myMap(arr, callback) {
    let result = []
    for (let item of arr){
        result.push(callback(item)) // push adds new item to end of array
        // for each item in array do callback
    }
    return result
}

const doubled = myMap(numbers, x => x * 2)

console.log(doubled)
```

An example of **async** that is explicitly easy to understand and see is the below code where the code runs then prints after 2 seconds even though done is already printed.

```javascript
function adder(x, y, callback) { 
    // sets a timer for 2 seconds before answer
    setTimeout(() => callback(x + y), 2000) 
}

adder(5, 10, answer => console.log(answer))

console.log('done')
```

Using callbacks on an API example below using dadjokes API

```javascript
function getJoke(cb) {
    req = new XMLHttpRequest()
    req.addEventListener('load', event => cb(event.target.response.joke))
    req.open('GET', 'https://icanhazdadjoke.com') // HTPP request, URL
    req.setRequestHeader('Accept', 'application/json')
    req.responseType = 'json'
    req.send() 
}

getJoke(joke => console.log(joke))
getJoke(joke => document.body.innerHTML += `<p>${joke}</p>`)
```

1. The getJoke function is defined, which takes a single parameter cb. This parameter is expected to be a callback function that will be executed with the joke data once the request is complete.

2. Inside the getJoke function, a new XMLHttpRequest (req) object is created. XMLHttpRequest is an API in JavaScript used to make HTTP requests to servers.

3. An event listener is added to the load event of the req object. The event listener is defined as an arrow function with the event parameter. When the load event is fired (i.e., when the request is completed and the response is available), the arrow function will be executed.

4. Inside the arrow function, cb(event.target.response) is called. Here, event.target.response represents the response data from the server. Since you set req.responseType = 'json', the response data will be automatically parsed as JSON, and event.target.response will be a JavaScript object.

5. The getJoke function continues by setting up the HTTP request configuration:
        The req.open method is used to set up the request. It specifies the HTTP method ('GET') and the URL ('https://icanhazdadjoke.com') to which the request will be sent.
        The req.setRequestHeader method sets the request header to indicate that the client expects a JSON response ('application/json').

6. The req.responseType is set to 'json', which tells the XHR to automatically parse the response data as JSON and convert it into a JavaScript object.

7. Finally, the HTTP request is sent to the server using the req.send() method.
8. Outside the getJoke function, the getJoke function is called with an arrow function as the argument. This is the callback function that will be executed with the joke data.
   
9.  When the HTTP request completes and the response is available, the event listener defined earlier will be triggered. It will call the provided callback function with the joke data (the response from the server).
    
10. The callback function (joke => console.log(joke)) is executed, and the joke parameter represents the joke data received from the server (a JavaScript object). The joke data is then logged to the console using console.log(joke).