# **React SPAs and Routing**

## **Routing**

In react instead of navigating through pages, you are able to navigate through components so that there is only 1 html page which would be the index page. 

In this instance of the lesson the use of `npm i react-route
r-dom`

`import { BrowserRouter, Routes, Route } from 'react-router-dom'`

* Browser Router is what monitors the URL and address, does the heavy lifting can be though of as a router
* Routes has to be a child of Browser Router because this is what it uses to find the routes
* Route is then of course the child of Routes

The reason both are needed is because of this

```javascript
    <BrowserRouter>
      {/* Able to put things that don't depend on routes but is fine just in Brwoser Router*/}
        <Route path='/' element={<Home />} />
      </Routes>
    </BrowserRouter>
```
Routing works very similarly to flask in which you declare the path and then where it goes. In JSX route can be nested as well for easier visualization. So this below is party of `/entry` and then after it would be `/new` to navigate to.

```javascript
        <Route path='/entry'>
          <Route path='new' element={<NewEntry />} />
        </Route>
```
When using a `Link` tag in the use of Bootstrap it is reliant on being within a BrowswerRouter. If Navbar was above Browser Router then it would not work so it needs to be moved into the BrowserRouter. Through the use of the `<Link>` tag instead of the `<a>` tag instead of reloading the page with different components, it instead will be unmount and remount components as needed from the DOM.

In the use case example here 
```javascript
// App file
    <BrowserRouter>
    <Navbar />

// Navbar component file
      <Link class="nav-link active" aria-current="page" to="/">
         Home
      </Link>
```

Similary to flask to be able to get dynamic routes, a parameter is given. The below allows the `new/` to be dynamic as the category, however to allow the category to be specified and included somethign else needs to be done.

```javascript
    <Navbar />
      <Routes>
        <Route path='/' element={<Home />} />
        <Route path='/category' element={<CategorySelection />} />
        <Route path='/entry'>
          <Route path='new/:category' element={<NewEntry />} />
        </Route>
```

What needs to be done is in the file that needs it, which in this case the `NewEntry` component is import `import { userParams } from 'react-router-dom'` then call use params. The below code shows that the the 'category' portion of this `<Route path='new/:category'` is sent as an object as the `:` signifies the parameter after, which then returns `Object { category: "parameter name"}`

```javascript
const NewEntry = () => {
   const params = userParams()
   console.log(params)
}
```

## React SPAs Part 2 + CRUD

## Express JS Intro

Class Notes:

When using the Express app, there are 2 consoles, one is for the server and the other is running in the browser.

The reason it forever loads is because the server needs to have a route.

`app.use()` gets passed middleware to add to the chain

## Express API and MongoDB